... absent, as you well know. Um, we've got the Minister for Oceans and
Fisheries coming in. Uh, is everyone happy here-
I think
so too. ... given that the meeting has started to have Suze
Redman officiate as chair of the committee?
Yes. Yep. Yeah.
Brilliant. Thanks, team. Thank you very much for your collegiality.
I will leave it in your capable hands.
Suze, carry on.
Ka pai. Right, welcome everyone. Shall we, we...
Are we talking first, Carla, or should we just bring, get the minister in and then-
We can go straight in and also... Oh, oh, sorry. I can't hear me.
Um-
How long have we got him here for?
45 minutes.
Yeah, so over the page I've highlighted the hearing times there.
9:00 to 9:45 for Minister Jones, then we do have
15 minutes for consideration, and then we've got, um, Minister Patterson at
10:00. Um, also just so everyone's awareness, the Australian High
Commission, um, is... has let us know that Australia's Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Primary Industries will be attending the public
hearing. So there's a list of four names there, members of that committee who are
gonna be tagging along as well. Um, cool, all right-
Plus the Deputy High Commissioner and policy officer.
Yeah.
Six, six of them.
(?) .
Carla, can you just let us know when we're live, please?
I think we are now.
Oh, okay.
It's live now, live now, Mark.
Th- thanks, Mike.
Should I name them?
I'm very bothered. Yeah. You'll be fine,
Suze. You'll be great.
(laughs)
Kia ora!
Good morning, Minister.
Haere mai, Ray. Hang
on, I've got the mic.
It's nice to meet you, Ray.
Ha ha ha.
Nau mai. (laughing)
Fabulous team. Oh, you rearranged yourselves.
(laughs)
We have.
Good morning, Minister. We have you here in your capacity as Minister for Oceans
and Fisheries for 45 minutes.
Yep.
Thank you very much. Hey, look, I'd also like to take this time
while you're all sort of se- um, seated, um, to welcome
Australia's Parliamentary Standing Committee. So, we have Ms.
Neryl Swanson, Mr. Jamie Chaffie, Ms.
Trish Cook, Mr. Joel Bateman, and also the Australian Deputy High
Commissioner, Ben Milton, and policy officer Liam Taylor.
So welcome here.
If you'd like to just do some introductory remark and then I'm sure that we'd be
appreciative.
Okay, yep. Kia ora. Um, to the members
who aren't hooked in, uh, physically,
greetings, uh, to members of the committee.
Scrutiny week wasn't around when Winston and I were here, before we
were unceremoniously dumped. But wait, we're back.
(laughs)
So, I want to
ensure that the team and I, Mr.
Bolger, the CEO, will not only answer your questions but
address some issues that have bubbled to the surface recently, uh,
in the media.
So, if I can just start
with
what we have done to date. We created some
certainty for the aquaculture sector.
I think it's important the committee bear that in mind.
I know there was a bit of controversy as to whether or not such permits should have
been extended, but I can assure you, given that we're all after economic
growth, the people that comprise the investors of that sector have confirmed to us
that they're growing. We will be proceeding with our fisheries
reforms through the House. Obviously, there will be a significant
opportunity for all of the parliamentarians around the House
to test whether or not those reforms are
consistent with what the New Zealand public wants from its
fishery resource. Um,
I have also, uh, been away on a few international
forays, as you know. We spend a small fortune through the
fisheries foreign affairs budget.
A lot of that goes to Honiara, where we
maintain the costs associated with the fishing foreign
agency having its base for the pelagic fisheries
and should never overlook the fact that kiwis for a long period of time have
underwritten their operation. So, although it's foreign
affairs, I'm the representative of the New Zealand government
when I go to those things. And then there is the vexed issue
of recreational fisheries.
Uh, the recreational fishery recent
demonstration
about boards and vehicles going over the Harbour Bridge, it
seemed to me, uh, that
they've finally woken up to the fact that the government and all the parties of the
House
committed to what are known as HPAs.
And these are an innovation
covering about 12% or thereabouts of the Hauraki Gulf.
It took 15 years to put that kaupapa together.
I was never an historic supporter of it, but we all voted for that
legislation. A small concession
was entered into with the mullet fishermen around Kawau Island and one other
island, but a tiny fraction
for three to six months per year, but I don't want to shy away from the fact, for
a number of the people that have been blighting your social media
feeds, uh, don't understand it and,
um, they've perhaps catastrophized it.
Then there is the vexed issue of the mahua.
So there was a, uh, politician, and I will finish here, Madam Chair.
There was a politician called Colin Loyal back in the days of, uh, the Lange
government-... he arrived at a concession when they created the
QMA that the sports fishery, the broadbill fishery, would be kept out
of commercial fisheries administration.
Uh, fast-forward, that, um,
compact
was changed and, uh, swordfish
came part of the QMA, and the leaders of the
Marlin Fishery Sports Club hate it.
And they have alleged that what I've been doing is circuitously
trying to bring that majestic marlin fisher
(clears throat) into the QMS. That is wrong.
There is no paper evidence that I'm doing that.
All I've done
has initiated some, uh, consultation, should the
300 or 400 marlin that are caught through the commercial guise
incidentally be left in the ocean or brought back to land.
That's all I'm doing.
So, it's a, uh, issue of inverse relationships, a relatively small
amount of fish-
(clears throat)
... creating a massive, um, overreaction.
So, the officials are working through with me so we get
both sides of the argument and arrive at a conclusion
that doesn't distract us from the deeper question, what to do with the
broader multi-billion dollar fishery resource.
(clears throat)
So, if you don't mind, I'll just leave it there with those
initial remarks and then, and hand it back to you
guys.
Thank you very much, Minister. Um, we have a question from Mark
Cameron.
Minister Jones, it's always a pleasure to see you sir, and I apologize for my
absence. I am online as you can well see.
Um, y- you talked a- a- h- using the word
catastrophization, and I, and I hone in on that.
I think there's been a certain degree of that.
But if I could prosecute the concerns with the marlin that you've
raised, as you have rightly raised, um,
that you are in consultation of the 300 or 400 marlin that are caught as
bycatch, and do they get returned to, uh, the sea or,
um, uh, are brought back to
land. Is there an economic
benefit if there were to be a market for them to have them
brought back to land? And I suppose that's the driving initiative behind
bringing them back anyway, or have them landed.
If that was the case, would you say here today
that, that, that the current advice i- i-
is in development a- and you haven't made any informed
decisions either way in that argument, correct?
(clears throat) Yeah, I... O- obviously, I can't spill all the paperwork, but
I can assure you on the record that Mr.
Bolger and his team are canvassing both sides of the
argument, and, um, our office and our
officials have not made a call. There is a wee bit of marlin that is
imported to New Zealand, and I've had this proven to me by the officials.
It comes out of Fiji, so it's not as if marlin is
not being consumed, admittedly in a relative l- in a, in a modest
way. But
the fear, um, uh, sir, the fear is
that if we enable the longliners, and they're not
large in number, to bring this incidental marlin catch
back to land, it will feed an appetite where they
will go and deliberately, at nighttime, use large lights
to target that fish species. I have no evidence that they would do
that. But at this stage, they are not allowed to bring it back, and until
such time regulations are changed, they cannot
bring in land that fish. That is the actual
situation as we sit here in front of you today.
Thank you, sir, for your clarity.
I've got a sup on this one because the other concern that, um, the
recreational fishers have raised, which I have asked MPI as well, so you've
probably, hopefully seen that transcript, is that even though
you've said the intention is not to have it end up in the QMS, the
concern is that ultimately that will happen, h- perhaps in the future, that it's
like a slippery slope essentially.
Once you allow a small amount of commercial
opportunity through this species, that eventually there'll be an argument put
forward for it to just be part of the QMS.
So, I guess my question is can you assure the public, can you assure the
committee that it is not your intent for it to ultimately end up in the
QMS and that you'll, you know, stick to that?
Okay. I think my facts are right, Madam Chair.
Between 2002 and 2004, I'm not
entirely sure if it was Jim Anderton, but it was the Helen Clark
government, swordfish developed
catch history.
And I, I don't want to put anyone to sleep, but this is how the system works.
No, no, no. Yeah. Good.
Swordfish developed a catch history, and that catch history was
used as a basis for the creation and the allocation
of quota, thus commercializing access rights to
the sword fishery.
And the allegation is that somehow I've bumbled along and
created an opportunity for that to happen again.
I have never had advice from Mr. Bolger or the
CEO to head in the direction of commercializing
marlin. And until such time,
uh, we get that advice, I'm not going to
gainsay their advice, but I want everyone to know, as I've said,
we're deeply... Look, I, I want the sports fishery of New Zealand to
grow. I think it's, um, a great
opportunity for further tourism.
Mm-hmm.
But I also want people to know
that
morally it just doesn't sit right with me that we leave all this kai back in the
ocean. But having said that, I
realize that
the fisher- that the people who have invested in the marlin fishery are very
suspicious because of what they believe happened in the Helen
Clark government-
(clears throat)
... to certain commitments that Colin Moyle from the Lange
government-... had made to their group.
Mm-hmm.
And I'm deeply conscious of that. But I don't want to sort of blurt something
out until I've had the formal advice.
When will we make a decision? Uh, I don't want to be rushed into doing something
10 days out of Christmas.
And it's probably, uh, a good idea to
be professional and maybe early in the new
year, um, make an announcement.
Mm-hmm. I've got a few more sups on this. So, I guess, I guess from...
Thank you for, for the engagement, um, by the way.
It's good to have a good dialogue about this.
Um,
I guess, I didn't hear though, a categorical ruling out of ever including it in the
Q&S. And I think that is what that community do want to hear-
Yeah.
... is that categorical ruling out that you wouldn't-
Mm-hmm.
... ever consider putting it into the Q&S.
Okay. So,
race bit. Ordinarily, when the
system gives the ministers advice, what process do we
take? 'Cause I'd rather get your advice first.
(coughs)
Yeah. Well, we would, we would probably, um, want to consult on that
idea-
Yeah.
... I imagine, uh, in a formal way. So, we, we, we'd put the options to
you, uh, what the ups and downs of them were, seek to
consult, come back with the view from the public.
Yeah.
Yeah. So there's been a bit of engagement.
Mm-hmm.
And I know Legacy and-
Yes. ... this other group of, um, uh, sort of, Cinderellas out of
this Instagram community-
Mm-hmm.
... seem to have gone quite nuts. They've all...
They put a whole lot of AI submissions in.
Mm-hmm.
They've got to go through, sieve them out.
But in my view, um, I see, uh,
I see that of all the fisheries reforms that I'm hoping to achieve on
behalf of our cabinet government, further alienating and
creating a molehill that people might seek to slay me upon is not a
priority that I (laughs)
Yeah, yeah. I've got two more very quick sups on this, the- Yeah. ? ?
? ? ? ? ? ? And then I'll note that for future-
Mm-hmm.
... that I do have lots more primaries.
But, um, when I asked MPI earlier in the week, they
mentioned it was around 600 per year, but you said 300 to 400.
So I'm just wondering if there's- I think, I, I, sorry, I think, I think I said
around 600, uh, since January '24.
Okay.
So, that's almost two years-
All right. Okay.
... that aligns with the system.
All right. Thanks for the clarity.
Another question I asked MPI, but I think I probably know where you'll go with this
was, whether it would be included in the legislation next year on
fisheries reform, whether you'd be looking to include it in that reform- Um-
... or will it be a separate piece of...
Yeah. So,
I can see this is... Just give me a, a little bit of an opportunity-
Come
on. ... uh, Madam Chair.
So, (sighs) this marlin
fishery, I really think there's a unique
feature of New Zealand's broader fishery, partly 'cause the history that
I just relayed.
And as you know, I am looking for ways to expand how the industry
itself can deliver more services within guardrails that cabinet
signs off on.
I've already talked to you about this, but that's still winding its way through the
process. And amongst other things, when we finish the consultation
process, which I think is pretty much drawn to an end, I want to explore with the
officials, how can this recreational
fishery be better managed with greater input from
the sports clubs themselves?
Mm-hmm.
But I say to the sports clubs, be very careful what you ask for.
(clears throat)
Because once you have a greater level of responsibility, which is what they tell me
they want, 'cause they said that I'm Kore Take.
I haven't, uh, been a good steward of the marlin fishery.
So if they want to be more and more involved, like the Acclimatization Society for
duck shooting, then be very careful what you ask for.
Mm-hmm. (laughs) Okay. ? ? ? on that, but I do have another
primary ? ? .
Okay. ? ? , thank you.
(Kewaiian language) Um, joining you
remotely as well. Uh, I, I, I was wondering, and, and you did talk about it a bit,
uh, earlier about your intentions with, uh, um,
with the amendment, your amendment proposals for next year as well.
And I, I wanted to get your perspective on the legalization and
dumping and discarding of fish at sea.
Um, uh, and, uh, wh- where the flow
of the a- o- of the amendments coming through the House, which you said won't
be in the next two weeks, thankfully, uh, but probably next year, where are
you sitting with that at this particular point in time?
Okay. Okay. So, A- as you know, um,
MPI have initiated some consultation over whether or
not, uh, we should continue
to dump at sea, the marlin and the reef
fishery, including the red bore or some appropriately named
fish, given that I look at some of my opponents. Yeah.
At the moment, all of that fishery, uh, ? ?
, you're not allowed to land or bring back
if you're on the East Coast. But if you're on the West Coast,
you can. So the reason that we've been consulting
and for, for a broader range of, uh, species is to try and
get some uniformity between the Taitama Tane
being the male element on the West Coast and the more placid approach being the
East Coast. But given that the protest happened on the East Coast over the Harbour
Bridge, I might have to change my Maori language in that regard.
(laughs)
So now, the work that we're wanting to do
through our big fisheries reforms, which Mr.
Bolger's shepherding through bureaucratically, is if we have the
cameras and if we have surveillance,
and we're able to record the behavior of the captains and the
crew on these vessels, rather than bring it back and
suffer more bureaucratic red tape,
they can dispose of it at sea. Because if they're breaking the law, the cameras
will have recorded. And we've got the senior, um, dressed like a
military man, uh, Steve-
(laughs)
... um, from our, uh, department of enforcement, they will be able
to charge and prosecute people if they've broken the law.
My... I, I told you this before, my personal view with the
cameras, if they don't, uh, have a case to bring it back, they can leave it
at sea. But if they break the law, the cameras will show they have to be
prosecuted.
Thank you. Mark, do you have a sup-
Okay. Just, just-
... view, view as well?
... a sup on that one. Um, uh, just, just, uh, I wonder, and, and maybe
officials can help you about-... whether you're looking at
changes around section 82B, which is around avoiding, remedying,
or mitigating any adverse effects of the fishing on the aquatic
environment. Um, if you've got any thoughts around that, that would be good.
Like any successful politician, I will pass the parcel to the appropriate official.
Styns.
Is there anyone remotely across...
Uh, uh, section 88 is what we used to, uh, successfully prosecute the Maori
claims. That's all I remember about 88.
So,
why, why don't I follow up, Madam Chair, with a written response
to what's a reasonable question, but it's a level of granularity.
It probably deserves a written response-
Okay.
... which thankfully won't come from me.
It'll come from a-
Well, thank you. Uh, uh, pro- pro- probably the...
I mean, the crux of it is around, um,
statutory potentials... well, statutory obligations to ensure
sustainability. Um, so I'm, I'm just sort of wondering how that will
be, uh, embedded in, uh, in, in the legislation.
Oh,
If not, um-
Okay.
... if you could give us some thoughts on that, that would be good.
Okay. Yeah.
So-
So, the purpose of the act... You know there are twin approaches.
There's utilization and there's sustainability.
We are not changing the purpose of the Fisheries Act and
diminishing the importance of sustainability.
What we think we're doing is improving
productivity, enabling a whole bunch of issues that have
floated around right back to the days of Phil Heatley, right back to the
days of Mr. Luxon, right back to the days of Doug Kidd.
And we've now got an opportunity to strip out of the system
these, um, obstacles to w... of, of productivity.
But we are not
undermining or destroying the purpose, the kaupapa of
the statute. And there's not much more I can say other than that.
Thank you.
A- And just one, one last stuff. It's just around that consultation piece.
You know, I did hear earlier, um, some remarks about
consultation. We are heading into the, the holiday
period. Um, and so public consultations on, on
these issues-
Oh,
yeah. ... is difficult. Um, so I was wondering their thoughts to
that.
Yeah. So, as, as I understand, um, we've been running,
uh, for a few weeks now, the consultation.
And if there were to be... I mean,
what I've asked the CEO to do is that once we arrive at a, at, at a set of
outcomes for this wretched marlin thing, then
I want the CEO at the top of the tree with Mr.
Bolger to then engage, um, with these,
uh, characters from the sports fishing clubs so
that our government isn't accused of not having
engaged with the peak body.
Yeah.
Now, that peak body, as you know, wants to ensure
that marlin is not commercialized, not brought back to shore,
and remains within their exclusive
domain. And then we'll know exactly
where the common ground is. So, I'm not imagining that we're going to impose
consultation obligations while people are all gossiping around the
barbecue.
Okay. We've just got a sup from Mark Cameron.
Yeah. Minister, if we could just circle back to the cameras, becau- because you
mentioned the, the, the cameras, sir.
And I'm, I'm grateful that you brought it into the conversation.
Mm-hmm.
Um, you had mixed views in the past, and, and, and you've shared your opinions
o- o- on their inception and, and where they, uh, uh, they
are now as part of an industry good.
What is your thoughts on the data sharing and capture, and do you
think that is being, um... how, how do I
say this? Uh, utilized in the... in, in the best fashion for the
industry going forward?
Well,
I came off second-best in that debate.
The Prime Minister reminded me-
Mm-hmm.
... that I am a member of the Cabinet.
Cabinet made a call, and, uh, my own
leader, uh, told me given that I know
constitutional law, I should be... at, at all times practice it.
Mm-hmm.
So, that is now the position of the government.
Ray Smith, uh, also reminded me that
it is the state-
(coughs)
... who does the prosecutions, not the minister.
But the state, in reviewing that material, has
also got a vested interest in educating people.
Mm-hmm.
Not just smashing them over.
The fishing industry itself did not agree with me, Mark.
And sadly, a company that I used to be the chair of-
(laughs)
... um, turned against my sort of philosophical
priorities. So, after that, I was pretty much gone.
(laughs)
So, Steve behind me, um, I'm very conscious.
I won't say too much publicly about prosecution decisions, but I have
been assured that the material, uh, is highly
protected. But it's as much for an educational purpose, and
only in egregious cases will prosecutions flow.
But that's up to, uh, the CEO and, um, the, the kind
of, uh, the uniform branch of the MPI.
Thank you, Minister.
Very good, Minister. Very good. Thank you so much.
Yep. Prime Minister, we've got a primary question for
you. And actually, that's, uh, that's a fantastic segue because I just wanted to talk to
you about-
(laughs)
... that fantastic Nelson company that you used to be a chair of.
Um, obviously it's devastating that Sea Lord have had job losses, and,
uh, I'm interested in your comments around that.
Um, and also if you'd be interested in, uh, I guess commenting
on Doug Paulon's comments about the role the supermarkets have
played in terms of their margins. Because one of the things he said publicly
is that for their coated
products-... that's been, uh, difficult selling them into
the market in New Zealand because of the, you know, the
behavior of our supermarket job leg.
And I remember when you were a minister in a previous, um-
(laughs) ... or maybe an opposition, opposition member in a previous party, in
an excellent political party-
(laughs)
... um, we- we had a bit of a campaign about the- the supermarket
behavior with, um, towards suppliers.
So, I just, I guess, I'm sure you share my concern
around Sealord losing jobs.
Yeah.
Um, it's not what either of us would want to see, and I'm just keen on if you've
got any commentary on how we, how we can support this industry, all of us I
think, regardless of political party-
Yeah.
... to- to be sustainable, to be able to grow because, you
know, that has hurt a lot of jobs and I know Sealord are not happy about it either.
Well, um, thank you for that question, but I would say
that it's not just the fisheries. I'm sure the CEO receives this
kind of feedback from the VG growers and others in the primary
sector. In our coalition agreement, there was a reference
between National and New Zealand First about
supermarket reform
that ******* has been taken up by the Minister of
Finance. You'd be aware that there's the, uh,
fast track thing going through. Then there's gonna be a policies, general policy
statement
that could be utilized to get better competitiveness in the
supermarkets.
Um, look, can I, can I say three things?
Mm-hmm.
Number one,
what does New Zealand's society want in terms of the
priority of Kiwis being
the major beneficiaries of our fisheries
system?
Yeah.
And where's the balance between drawing on foreign
labor, um,
and not displacing Kiwis either on shore
or on sea? And- and rather than that being seen
just as a parliamentary issue, what do Kiwis want?
I mean, do you want a system where our primary sector,
whether it's the people coming from New Delhi to- to blight the,
uh, the kiwifruit sector with all sorts of lurid
allegations about human slavery.
I mean, I- I hear these all the time.
I mean, what do we want as New Zealanders?
And where I sit
as both as an MP and a minister and as a Maori, so I
want these primary sector industries to meet the needs of garden variety
kiwis so we can keep them believing that there's a future in our
country. And when that, uh, closure
took place, I'm sure there was some deep accounting behind it.
Mm-hmm.
But it's as much a- a deep New Zealand issue.
Yeah.
And in the way that Aussies tend to, uh, focus on some of the industries and
just say, "To hell with it, we're going to have this industry whether it costs us
or not."
Yeah.
And I'd say to us as politicians, you know, where do we sit on that
spectrum, whether it's the lamb industry, the forest industry?
And I'll try it as much as I can to, um, boost those jobs
here in New Zealand, but, um, if we're not gonna
process fish in New Zealand, then we've got to process more at
sea and then it's gonna go where it goes, China or whatever.
That's
So that's a New Zealand society question.
And when we bring these issues forward for debate, just be absolutely
sure that we're balanced in all of our debates.
And I think there's been some lack of balance in these areas.
And nowhere do I see it more than the kiwifruit sector,
and I have to say progressively in the fishery sector.
But then I'm told
that, uh, Rachael, I'm told that a lot of the companies
need the foreign labor to remain solvent.
That's not the view of Sir Peter Talley.
Mm-hmm.
So, you know, it's hard to think of a more rural family, more successful
than the- the Talley clan in the primary sector.
So I don't want to give a definitive answer, but I want to put it where it belongs.
It's- it's very much a societal issue and I know the men to both sides of
me, they agree. It's where are we going as a country?
Mm-hmm. And look, I agree with you on a lot of that. I think, um...
And I think just as a Nelson MP, obviously this has been concerning, you know, for
us in terms of Sealord. And so I guess that is part of my question is,
in the fisheries part in particular, which is where you do have responsibility,
can... Are there more levers we can pull?
Is there more government can do to help drive ensuring that those jobs are kept in
New Zealand?
Well, without delving too deeply into the Sealord question-
Mm-hmm.
... I'm sure it costs them a small fortune to run their factories on the port.
Yep.
And I wonder whether or not they have been back and spoken to the port.
Look, the level of burden that you've got upon this, which is
essentially a commodity industry as such, um, unless you
kind of re- revisit some of this cost structure, it's difficult for
us to run these commodity businesses on your port.
Mm-hmm.
Because I don't hear similar complaints from Sir
Peter Talley's enterprise in Motueka.
Yes.
So I- I don't think it's just a matter of labor
and fisheries. I think it's a- a matter of the costs of running these businesses in
certain locations. And for fear of someone writing me a letter to
subsidize it, I won't say any more.
Yes, I know who might do that, yeah.
(laughs)
Tian, do you have a sup on this question?
Uh, no, no, mine wasn't primary, so no sup on this.
Yeah. Uh, I'm- I'm... I've got more, I've got more
primaries but I'm happy to-
Um-
... you know, share the love. Yeah, yeah.
Um, yeah. Tian, would you like to ask your primary now? Thank you.
Yeah, sure. Kia ora. Uh, Kia ora, Minister.
Uh, my question is about one of your favorite topics, climate change.
I know you love it. Um, uh, uh, pre- previously just in the House,
we- we did have a back and forth around our marine environment, uh,
report. Um, uh, and it's been a bit of time since that
engagement, and I wonder if you've had any further reflection on
that report, uh, and particularly around the impacts that it ca- that-
that what the report says could have on the- on the fishery
industry. Because-... uh, I know you're big on that.
Um, and so I was wondering if you've done any policy work
or asked your officials to do any kind of policy work
around what they could look like, particularly with the amendments, uh,
fisheries amendments that you're proposing for next year?
Okay, I did anticipate this question.
(laughs) Oh, well done.
And, um-
(laughs)
... uh, in the audience, um, Teano is my wife, and her advice
to me as I came into this, uh, session was, "Shane, don't make it all about
yourself."
(laughs)
So, no, it's a genuine question and-
(clears throat)
... um, Madam Chair, I wanna call on our expert at the policy
level to just address what he's
saying. Has the fisheries disconnected from climate
change? Is that cool with you?
It's cool with me. Thank you.
Over to you, buddy.
Thanks, Minister.
Now come closer so everyone can hear you.
Um-
(laughs)
... yeah. I mean, obviously, you know, we do
look at the evidence and information about what the impacts of climate
change can be on warming seas and how that might affect fisheries, the
distribution of fisheries. You know, we see some fisheries moving further
south, um, into cooler waters. So, um, that is something
we- we do think about and, um,
what I'd probably say, just, you know, as a- as a, you know, what's right in front
of us is, and- and what you'll be seeing when the bill comes to you, uh,
next year, is w- one of the responses to this is to think about,
"Well, what are our regulatory systems?
How do we make those a bit more agile, a bit more flexible to account for
the changes that we might see, and that those changes could be faster and
more rapid than we're used to?" So, we do want a system that allows us to be more
responsive to those changes when they occur.
And so there will be, you know, the- the changes that the minister has announced,
part of that is about using the, um, you
know, range of new data that we're getting from things like electronic reporting
and cameras, which will allow us to be a lot more responsive to changes in the
fisheries when they occur. So- so, um, that may not
be the full answer. Um, you know, we're still monitoring and seeing how
things play out, and there'll probably be further changes.
But this first bill, I think, is a way of- of actually starting to shape the
system to help address those, um, impacts as they play
out.
Mm-hmm. Just-
I mean, just- Just a tiny example, Teano.
Yeah.
In the South Island, I'm told that
types of fish that we associated with the North Island have now
drifted south.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, I just need, um, certain people in ?????
to follow the fish-
(laughs)
... in the South Island.
So, what- what I've asked the officials to look at,
and I don't want to get too technical, and it's possibly the first time I've said
it publicly but, how do we cope
when big fishing boats are catching fish
that was never there historically?
And because of the catching technology they use,
they're catching more of it. They can't avoid catching it.
And presumably, it's moving because of changing water
temperatures. So, how do we change the system
to recognize that when they catch that fish, they have
to pay what I call, um, a tax, which is a deemed value, 'cause they
don't have the quota for that fish.
Then if they're catching more of it, h- how do we respond to that?
Because they can't change the way they're catching fish.
They're not targeting that fish, but they bring it back in a
form, it's... Whilst it's not worthless, it is
not, um, designed... It- it is incapable of capt-
capturing a high price because of the way they caught it.
They didn't know it was there until the last three or four years.
So, Ray and his... M- Mr. Smith and his team are looking at options.
Can there be flexibility without grossly penalizing
men and women who are catching that fish, and they have no intention of catching
it, but they cannot avoid it because of changing temperatures?
Is that reasonable?
So, that's one small example. Uh, whether or not that finds
favor, uh, in society through the-
the process, I'll endeavor to bring it to the attention of the select committee
some point next year. But we've got to have practical solutions
because, uh, the fish is heading to Te
Waipounamu, ??????.
Yay.
Sorry.
(laughs)
Okay, so before we move on to anything-
Could have been a good ?????? Just- just kind of one-
one quick set on top, which is... 'Cause you talked about the fishing
boats as well. One of the things that I've noted in that- in that report also was
the impact on coastal communities.
Um, so, you know, fishing boats are gonna leave from somewhere.
Um, what thinking will be made, uh, in
terms of- of those particular communities?
It's going to get, I imagine, more difficult a- as temperature
rises, uh, with the oceans and of course everything else as well.
So, is that factoring in- in any of the- the minister's thinking, or
officials'?
Well,
let's face it. Recently, a couple of people in
that coastal community constituency that we're talking about,
um, they had to step back while we made some changes to try
and improve the survival prospects of the Hoiho-
Mm-hmm.
... um, penguin. And I can't talk too much about that because these
inveterate
sort of, um,
addicted litigators
funded by someone shadowy down there in the South Island, they got me in court.
So that's all I'll say about that. But the reality though is
we want more little boats to be viable.
But if we're gonna continue to do what we've historically done, and
you know, we are a center-right government to kind of let the owners of the assets
deploy them in a way
that makes rational sense, um, in order to
give more opportunity for that constituency you're talking about, you're probably
talking about introducing some more regulations at some
point to direct how quota owners make their quota
available, targeted at certain owners of
boats.... and I can assure you, uh, Madam Chair, I have no
mandate from the cabinet to stray off in that direction.
Although, every time I go into the regions, I'm implored to do just
that.
Okay. Mark, do you have a sup on this question?
You're on mute, but I gather that's a prime...
Look, before we move on, I just want to acknowledge Dot.
Welcome to the best (laughs) -
(laughs) ... best select committee in Parliament, the Primary Productions-
It's just us.
... Select Committee. Sorry, I didn't see you earlier. Right. Rachael, fire away.
I had a, I had a supplementary on this, um, and it's, it's a s- it's a
slight, um, movement away from Te Ano's original line of questioning,
but I don't think the public understand necessarily enough that
this sector actually has lower emissions than a lot of our other primary
industries. And we've got huge opportunities,
um, as a nation to grow this sector, which would help
drive down our emissions and actually improve climate change out-
climate change outcomes, while also growing jobs.
So, is that something that the ministry's looking at in terms of
policy? Like, how can we, you
know...
Well, well they-
Sorry, other sec- primary industry sectors, but I love this one.
Well-
Can we, can we really throw everything into this one to
actually, you know, get, get lower emissions as a nation, and also
use the opportunities that we have-
Probably-
... from the oceans?
Probably the best, the best opportunity presented here is, is m- more people in the
world are eating fish from agriculture growth than-
Yeah, I was gonna get to agriculture, so, so, yeah.
Right. So, but in New Zealand, it's not that way around.
So, we haven't really used our coastal environment,
uh, our economic zone particularly.
You know, our landmass, we've op- we optimize.
Yeah.
At sea we've kind of operated in a protective way that hasn't allowed for
agriculture growth other than that that's already been consented.
It's been impossible for companies to get consents.
It took, um, Blue Endeavor 11-
Yeah.
... years and 10 million dollars-
Hard
... to get that thing in the Cook Strait, which is pretty ambitious actually.
So, um, the plan to o- to put open ocean agriculture out through, particularly
from sort of Christchurch, bit south of Christchurch, down through to Stewart
Island, uh, where the water's cooler, about 20 Ks out, um, it's a
very low impact way of creating protein-
Mm-hmm. Yes.
... and fishing. So, the, the only, the only, the only thing that
for s- for the seafood industry, you know, one emissions issue that they
have, which is unique to them, is of course, they use a lot of diesel and a lot of
fuel. So, and you know, when, when those prices are high, 50 to 60%
of their costs can be chewed up in just getting out there and doing their thing.
So, one of the challenges for them going forward will be just how over
time that can be resolved. That's a worldwide problem.
It's not unique to New Zealand.
Mm-hmm. So, I mean, I know other members of the committee may not agree with
me on this, but yeah, how can we support a transition away from reliance
on, on dairy, through the reliance
on-
Well, you want to do both.
... this sector?
You want to do both.
Well, we want to do, of course we want to do both, but,
Rachael, are you sure you're in the right party?
(laughing) I mean, that is a very perceptive question.
(laughing) You could pick Nelson again.
But, but, but, but seriously, right, uh, we have huge opportunities in this
sector.
Okay. Let, let, let's-
Good for the climate. Great, great. ... let's go right, in it, right there.
But
I have been encouraged by the s- um, by the officials
to promote ideas at a political level, to
simplify the allocation of consents. They have been waiting.
They've done a lot of work well before my return to
politics. Um, I don't have a
cabinet mandate, but I have said publicly
that when we get back into the boxing ring, I believe there should
be a bespoke, dedicated piece of aquaculture
legislation dealing with the allocation of permits and
consents for the growth of aquaculture in New Zealand.
You've heard me say this before, it's not government policy.
We are supporting the Act Party as a New Zealand first
minister, um, and, um, Labor, uh,
sorry, National to rewrite the RMA.
But, do you not... If you're asking me, Shane, you're pro-industry, and if you're
asking me with my bow tie on for New Zealand First, I've long said
that the focus of RMA has been so much on land,
that we need a bespoke legislation.
Now, I think it's outrageous that they spent 11, 12, 15
million dollars. You and I, as New Zealand politicians, should hang our heads in
shame that those investors were stranded in f- that period of
time. And I think it's outrageous, and thank, thank you Jenny
Marcroft for sticking up for the oyster farmers in Mahurangi.
They, they've been driven-
It amuses-
... to the level of penury-
Yep.
... because of, um, land based developments-
Mm-hmm.
... um, overseen by the council, and the pieces have to be
picked up by Watercare. And I don't want to go on a hate session with Watercare,
'cause they, I do believe now, come to the party in trying to find a
solution. But all of this cannot be dealt with
by a terrestrially based resource management system.
Yep.
I don't want to put Ray on the spot, but they have been
challenging, um, themselves and the, and the aquaculture
sector to come up with a more sophisticated way to grow this
segment. And if God is my witness, if I have a opportunity in the future, I'm
gonna do it.
So, would you support like, a marine spatial planning act type arrangement?
Yeah. It's, it's, uh, things like that.
For, for example, you may not know, in Helen Clark's time in
2002, 2003, '4, there was the
imbroglio of the seabed and foreshore.
She entered into, when I was the chairman of the Fisheries Commission, an
aquaculture settlement, and we got it wrong. I've said this in the past.
We did not guarantee to the Maori claimants that they would
get their resource consents. So, we now have a situation where a number
of iwi who have spent quite a bit of money
trying to get, uh, resource consents for space that
came to them via this sort of 2002 or something
settlement, and still they haven't got any
business within that space. I think that's outrageous....
and that's just a small example of why spatial planning, which guarantees
consents, should happen, um, as soon as possible.
Thank you. Right. Mark, do you have a question?
Yeah, I did have a question, but a- and largely, uh, minister, you've answered the
question. It was about attracting foreign investment into agricultural
and/or domestic investment, um, and in...
obviously, you talked about RMA, potential reforms and, and what
we are going to do as a government that would expedite that.
Do you see that y- that the aspirations,
where we sit, of growing the agriculture industry can be
realized in the time frames that we set ourselves?
Or do you think it's, um, a- it has a lot more work to do?
Look, I'll... Madam Chair, I'll just defer to the CEO 'cause he's recently
been to Japan. And amongst other things, they were talking about inward,
um, investment to New Zealand in the broader primary sector.
Yes, he wants to-
Yeah, I mean, I, I think, um... In
the dialogue I've had with, particularly with the Japanese who've got a long
history of investing here, the, uh... They are very interested.
And when you start talking about growth rates of maybe up to three billion
to 10 billion over 15 years, um, people start to take
notice. So, um, they would be very...
They... I think they'd be very keen investors in the agriculture
sector. Um, I... It, it's, it's...
What, what I found interesting in talking about it internationally is people
haven't really looked at New Zealand and thought about it in that way.
We, we... because it's been too difficult to get through the
consenting processes. Uh, but look, I mean, I think the
government's got a range of programs in place, whether it's, whether it's around
overseas investment, whether it's around, um-
Austria.
... costs of capital, in terms of, uh, the 20%, uh, concession,
uh, in, in their first, uh, capital outlay, uh, along with kind
of what's happening in the resource management changes to actually make this all
possible.
I just know we're living in a deficit world.
And I, I, I'm looking at, uh, opportunities that this, this government and future
governments can find to expedite our economic growth.
So, uh, thank you for your answer.
Yep. The, um,
the opportunity is there. The stuff sells itself.
Even with the tariffs, I'm told people are still buying our green-lipped
mussel. Uh, my dad would be rolling in his, uh,
rua, in his grave, to know that 20 or 30% apparently of the mussels are
going to pet food.
Mm-hmm.
I'm advised that families up in Asia no longer regard kids as
necessary. They wander around with little pets and they need to be fed.
And apparently green-lipped mussel is the, is, is the go. Hmm.
Now, we've met time, minister, but I do wonder if you would indulge us just for a
couple of minutes 'cause Jo Luxon has one question about-
Sure.
... Kaulipa. Is that okay? Thank you very much.
Thank you, Minister. Appreciate that, and appreciate your time and the officials'
time-
Great.
... again this morning. My question is, are you concerned about Kaulipa and the
potential impact on our recreational fishers, particularly in the area that you are
from?
And is your, uh, team doing any thinking around
what that might mean if it is something that cannot be got rid
of, even though it is dying back at the moment?
Yeah. So, before I defer to the experts, of course,
um, you and I should be deeply concerned.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I hail from Tai Tokerau.
The thing is spreading in the Bay of Islands.
Uh, there's a young bloke there, Andrew Johnson-
Yeah.
... who's come up with some technology.
I'm sure that you know of it. Um, although it's
biosecurity-
Mm-hmm.
... um, it comes up on a regular basis-
Yeah.
... to do with fisheries. And,
yeah, ir- irrespective of who the government is, Madam Chair, it's really
up to us as parliamentarians to
prioritize. How much do we-
Yeah.
... want to dedicate towards biosecurity
expenditure? Now, Jacinda threw a lot of dough at,
um... what the hell was it? Uh, the myco-
Mycoplasma virus.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm. It worked.
But whether or not I would have done it was irrelevant.
It was a big call made by her government, and we're gonna
reach a point,
uh, I think the public is gonna demand of us as politicians to
prioritize pūtea to deal with
marine-based threats in the way that we found the money to deal with
agriculture-based threats.
Mm-hmm.
And I do feel a rara for the, the team who, whether it's the
hornet, uh, threatening the honey industry, or Kaulipa,
we, um, probably need to reset our priorities based on what
the public expect us to do with their pūtea.
Can I ask a-
Very quick-
... very quick stuff on that one?
One minute.
Um, thank you for, um, that... for that, um, explanation.
And I've also raised that question with Minister Bogart about the amount that was
spent on mycoplasma and why not a similar or more thinking around
Kaulipa. Are you having those conversations with him as Minister for
Biosecurity to push for more funding for
Kaulipa?
Yeah. So, obviously we're running our fiscal strategy, and
your colleagues have already had, um, Nicola Wilson-
Mm-hmm.
... talk about our fiscal priorities and the
strategy. But, um, as a
pro, uh, primary sector of industry sort of guy, of
course I believe-
Yeah.
... we should dedicate more pūtea.
But just like in any government, it's in a debate of-
Mm-hmm.
... priorities. Um, and I, I do think though that the
public and boat owners, they need to be, um, a lot more vigilant
as well.
Yeah.
Um,
because, like, if I just give you an example.
Recently,
um, slightly tangentially, but it's the same thing,
Jo. We dedicated some pūtea to Jacksons Bay, way
the hell down near Fiordland. Why? 'Cause it wasn't...
Uh, Jenny went down there. It was sort of decrepit
infrastructure. And then the day
that they were there, Steve Hamm's
people, um, found that some
recreational, um, characters were breaking the law with bringing
some kai moana to shore.
Mm-hmm.
So, Steve and his team are gonna be stretched over
summer, so it's up to you and I as parliamentarians to
challenge our own community.
Mm-hmm.
Don't blame just the bureaucracy and the minister if you feel that
sustainability is not being delivered.
Take more responsibility for yourselves or we won't have a
country that has that bounty that we grew up with.
And the same with these threats to Kalua.
The more we can embrace the public, reward the public, I don't know, come up with
some better ways of incentivizing to share the
burden, because the state cannot do it by itself.
No.
Well, I don't believe, uh, Ray, that the state can do it by itself, so...
Mm-hmm.
So, I mean, just, so Steve Hamm obviously
just, you know, be a bit thoughtful.
They've got a hell of a job this summer and, uh,
also
although there's a reputation that sort of developed that I've kind of
created around like a drunken fisherman at the AGM of the commercial
fishery sector in Queenstown or something, I've actually closed a lot of things
down. I mean, we're very soon to make a decision that's more than
likely going to stop the access of
recreational and commercial people in New Zealand from taking crayfish
for the entirety of the Kaituki East Coast.
Those are very, very big decisions to make, but
I'm making it at some point in time because the officials have
used science and they've spoken to the public, and the public has said,
enough is enough. We have mined this resource to such a point
it can't survive if we stay on the current trajectory.
Mm-hmm.
So these decisions, they have to find public favor, and it's the same as
dealing with biosecurity.
We need to bring the public on board as well.
And hopefully I'm sounding lucid in that description or else I've meant to have
talked about the cray too bloody long ?????
(laughs)
but...
Thank you
for that. Thank you very much, Minister. We've reached our extended time, and thank you for
indulging us and thank you for being so passionate about the cray industry.
Fa'afetai. Thank you very much.
All right.
Thank you, Minister. Thank you, ............................